Proposal: Scrape Classes (#5572)
prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator: Documentation/proposals/202305-scrapeclasses.md

## Scrape Classes

* **Owners:**
  * `eronwright`

* **Related Tickets:**
  * https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/4121
  * https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/3922

This proposal aims to introduce the concept of _scrape classes_, to enable users to leverage scrape configuration data 
that is provided by the administrator. For example, to allow pod monitors and probes to safely use
unsafe TLS configuration fields (e.g. `keyFile`). 

## Why

Today, there are some scenarios that are difficult to support in a safe way, notably the need to reference 
a local TLS file in a scrape configuration. For example, to scrape a pod in an Istio mesh with strict mTLS would require that
the scrape configuration use a TLS keyfile that is provided by the Prometheus server's Istio sidecar. 
See [Istio documentation](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ops/integrations/prometheus/#tls-settings) for more details.

Another motivation is to improve feature parity amongst the monitor resources. The `PodMonitor` and `Probe` resources
aren't at parity with `ServiceMonitor` because the latter allows for unsafe TLS settings.

> A minor motivation is to decouple the monitor spec from low-level infrastructure details like TLS certificates.

Author: Given that probes have unique configuration elements, I suppose that the concept of a probe class may make sense. One could argue for introducing a `ProbeClass` and to use the term `MonitorClass` rather than `ScrapeClass`.

### Pitfalls of the current solution

> The only known solution for use cases where you'd need to use unsafe TLS settings is to use `additionalScrapeConfig`. 

Author: I revised the section to mention `ScrapeConfig`.

> The only known solution for use cases where you'd need to use unsafe TLS settings is to use `additionalScrapeConfig`. 

Author: Would you suggest that `ScrapeConfig` be mentioned in this document? Could you provide a snippet to be included?

> The only known solution for use cases where you'd need to use unsafe TLS settings is to use `additionalScrapeConfig`. 

Reviewer: It could be generic, keeping the `tlsConfig` example in mind:
```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: ScrapeConfig
metadata:
  name: scrape-config
spec:
  scrapeClass: istio-tls-etc
  staticConfigs:
    [...]
  httpSDConfig:
    [...]
  fileSDConfig:
    [...]
```

Taking my second comment into account, it could also define the different files from `fileSDConfig` as well as endpoints from `httpSDConfig`. At the moment though I'm only opening the discussion and want to see others' feedback as to extending the `ScrapeClass` to do more than just `tlsConfig` would make sense.

The downside is obviously the loss of a great feature of the Prometheus Operator. The monitor resources make it possible 
to compose the scrape configurations in a Kubernetes way.

## Goals

- Allow for the administrator to define a named, reusable scrape configuration snippet, including unsafe elements such as file references.
- Allow for a user to select a configuration snippet by name in their probe/podmonitor/servicemonitor endpoint configuration.
- Avoid giving the user the ability to use arbirary files within the Prometheus pod.

### Audience

- Users who serve Prometheus as a service and want to give their customers autonomy in defining monitors.
- Users who want to scrape pods within an Istio mesh.

## How

The proposed solution is to introduce a notion of a  _scrape class_, akin to a Kubernetes [storage class](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/storage-classes/). 

> A scrape class defines TLS settings (and possibly other settings in future) to be applied to all scrape endpoints of that class. 

Reviewer 2: > and possibly other settings in future

I'm trying to imagine the other settings that could be supported eventually. Proxy parameters might make sense but I'd be wary to include things like bearer tokens. It would be good to clarify what can/can't be considered in the future.

Reviewer: > Proxy parameters might make sense but I'd be wary to include things like bearer tokens.
For security reasons? Could `ScrapeClass` be made to live in the same namespace as `Prometheus` with RBAC left for the operators to configure?

Reviewer 2: For the same reason that we forbid direct file references to tokens in PodMonitors and Probes: if a ScrapeClass can hold a bearer token value, a "rogue" target could specify that ScrapeClass name in their monitor object and get access to the token value when being scraped by Prometheus.

Author: A counter-argument is that the administrator is explicitly offering the bearer token.  Assumedly the token would be file-based and rotating.

An example that comes to mind is [projected service account tokens](https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/containers-kubernetes/kubernetes-bound-service-account-tokens), wherein a OIDC token representing the Prometheus KSA would be used for authentication.

When defining a probe/podmonitor/servicemonitor, a user may optionally assign a class to each endpoint. 
A default class may be defined by the administrator.

Class names are assumed to be installation-specific. In practice, some common class names like `istio-mtls` are likely to emerge.

### Prometheus Resource

> It is proposed that the `Prometheus` resource contain a new section for defining scrape classes.

Reviewer: Is there a reason for it not to be its own CRD? That way ScrapeClasses can be managed separately from Prometheus itself, in the case where we have more settings than `tlsConfig` inside.

Author: Are you advocating for the `ScrapeClass` resource as outlined in alternatives?

Reviewer: https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/pull/5572/files#r1199707802

_The rationale for defining scrape classes inline is that, in practice, the TLS file paths are closely related to the `volumeMounts`
of the `Prometheus` spec. An alternative is outlined later, of factoring the class definitions into a separate resource._

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: Prometheus
spec:
  # optional: set a default scrape class

>   defaultScrapeClass: istio-mtls

Reviewer 2: another option would be to move this to the scrapeClass directly (and ensure that only one item is the default).

```
  scrapeClasses:
    - name: istio-mtls
      default: true
      tlsConfig:
        caFile: "/etc/istio-certs/root-cert.pem"
        certFile: "/etc/istio-certs/cert-chain.pem"
        keyFile: "/etc/istio-certs/key.pem"
        insecureSkipVerify: true
    - name: external-ca
      tlsConfig:
        caFile: "/etc/..."
        insecureSkipVerify: false
```

  # define scrape classes for use by the monitors
  scrapeClasses:
    - name: istio-mtls
      tlsConfig:
        caFile: "/etc/istio-certs/root-cert.pem"
        certFile: "/etc/istio-certs/cert-chain.pem"
        keyFile: "/etc/istio-certs/key.pem"
        insecureSkipVerify: true

  # mount the certs from the istio sidecar (shown here for illustration purposes)
  volumeMounts:
    - name: istio-certs
      mountPath: "/etc/istio-certs/"
```

### PodMonitor Resource
Allow the user to select a scrape class for each endpoint.
```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: PodMonitor
spec:
  podMetricsEndpoints:
  - port: http
    path: /metrics
    scrapeClass: istio-mtls
```

The suggested behavior is:
1. the `tlsConfig` in the associated scrape class is automatically applied to the scrape configuration of the endpoint.

> 2. the inline `tlsConfig` (if any) takes precedence over the `tlsConfig` in the scrape class.

Reviewer 2: Is the resulting TLS config 1) a merge between  the scrape class and the pod monitor TLS configs or 2) only the TLS config from the pod monitor?

Author: Can you think of an example where a merge would be meaningful?

I have the impression that `tlsConfig` in the monitor would provide application-specific TLS settings, whereas the scrape class would provide infra-level TLS (e.g. for the Istio case where TLS is transparent).

Reviewer 2: One example I can think of: Prometheus defines the "default" client TLS certificate and key but the monitor defines the serverName value.

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: Probe
spec:
  scrapeClass: istio-mtls
```

### ServiceMonitor Resource
Allow the user to select a scrape class for each endpoint.
```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
spec:
  endpoints:
  - port: http
    path: /metrics
    scrapeClass: istio-mtls
```

Deprecate the unsafe TLS settings in `ServiceMonitor`.

## Test Plan

1. Regression test; ensure no change to generated configs unless a scrape class is applied.
2. Optionality of the default scrape class; ensure that it is an optional configuration element.
3. Acceptance testing in Istio environment; ensure that the solution is effective for a key use case.

## Alternatives

### Global scrape TLS configuration
An alternative solution would be to apply a default TLS configuration to all monitors.

For example, via a hypothetical field `spec.scrapeTlsConfig`:
```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: Prometheus
spec:
  scrapeTlsConfig:
    caFile: "/etc/istio-certs/root-cert.pem"
    certFile: "/etc/istio-certs/cert-chain.pem"
    keyFile: "/etc/istio-certs/key.pem"
    insecureSkipVerify: true
```

Objections:

> 1. A singular default configuration may be too inflexible to effectively scrape a diverse set of pods. For example, in Istio, 

Reviewer 2: good call!

some pods may be in STRICT mode.

### Istio Permissive Mode
An alternative for the Istio use case is to use PERMISSIVE mode (see [documentation](https://istio.io/latest/docs/concepts/security/#permissive-mode)),
or to use `exclude` annotations on the pod such that the metrics endpoint bypasses mTLS.

Objections:
1. This solution is less secure at a transport level unless TLS is implemented at the application layer.
2. Strict mTLS is the basis for [Istio authorization policy](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/security/authorization-policy/), e.g. to explicitly allow access from prom to the metrics endpoint.

### ScrapeClass Resource
A variant of the proposed solution is to introduce a new custom resource for defining scrape classes.
```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ScrapeClass
metadata:
  name: istio
spec:
  tlsConfig:
    caFile: "/etc/istio-certs/root-cert.pem"
    certFile: "/etc/istio-certs/cert-chain.pem"
    keyFile: "/etc/istio-certs/key.pem"
    insecureSkipVerify: true
```

An open question is whether the resource would be cluster-scoped or namespace-scoped.

Objections:

> 1. Since the file paths are dependent on the volume mounts in the server, this approach may not achieve a meaningful decoupling.

Reviewer: should the `ScrapeClass` be limited to just the `tlsConfig` and its files though? I could imagine it holding the `ProberSpec` as well for instance, which could be more dynamic than the Prometheus deployment.

> 1. Since the file paths are dependent on the volume mounts in the server, this approach may not achieve a meaningful decoupling.

Reviewer 2: not sure I'm following.

> 1. Since the file paths are dependent on the volume mounts in the server, this approach may not achieve a meaningful decoupling.

Reviewer: Linking to my other comment for the complete context: https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/pull/5572#discussion_r1192333598

> 1. Since the file paths are dependent on the volume mounts in the server, this approach may not achieve a meaningful decoupling.

Reviewer 3: Just giving my .02 cents I agree with your use case on https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/pull/5572#discussion_r1192333598 but I'm still not 100% convinced.

As of now the main advantages to SrapeClass being their own CRD that I'm able to see are:
1. Users being able to do `kc get ScrapeClass`  to see the available classes and pick the more desirable one
2. If there are many ScrapeClasses then maintaining a big list in the `Prometheus`  resource might become cumbersome

> 1. Since the file paths are dependent on the volume mounts in the server, this approach may not achieve a meaningful decoupling.

Reviewer: The only other point I can see is to decouple the Prometheus CRD from the ScrapeClasses in the event of a Probe-like target managed by a different team (where ScrapeClasses could be managed by that same team). Now this might be a use case that's too little to consider.

After reading @EronWright's message on #prometheus-operator-dev (https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C01B03QCSMN/p1684516562355139?thread_ts=1684439235.731889&cid=C01B03QCSMN), I think we should be fine starting with inline, and can, if needed, reconsider a CRD at a later stage.
> 1. the basic idea is to separate the administrative inputs from the user inputs, and it seems likely to go beyond TLS, e.g. file-based bearer tokens.
> 2. Inline vs CRD aren’t mutually exclusive, and given the dependency on file mounts, I have a mild preference for inline class definition as a starting point.  If we go for a CRD, then please consider whether it would be namespaced and which namespace (prom or monitor?).
> 3. Is “scrape class” a good name, or would “monitor class” be better?  Are probes a type of monitor?

> 1. Since the file paths are dependent on the volume mounts in the server, this approach may not achieve a meaningful decoupling.

Author: Given the added complexity of introducing a `ScrapeClass` CR, I propose that we start with inline classes (marked as experimental) and revisit later.

### Non-Safe Monitors
Another alternative would be to allow `PodMonitor` and `Probe` to use unsafe TLS settings. 

Objections:
1. See [explanation](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/3922#issuecomment-802899950) for why 

> unsafe settings were disallowed in the first place.

Reviewer 2: As far as I understand, there isn't a real security concern for TLS parameters because the target never receives the TLS key in clear. But the issue exists for tokens, basic auth, ...

Anyway the current approach used for ServiceMonitor isn't something that we want to generalize because requiring that the owner of the ServiceMonitor knows in advance the location of the client TLS key & cert files in the Prometheus container creates too much coupling.

Yet another motivation is to decouple the monitor spec from low-level infrastructure details like TLS certificates.

### Pitfalls of the current solution

The only known solution for use cases where you'd need to use unsafe TLS settings is to use `additionalScrapeConfig`.
The downside is obviously the loss of a great feature of the Prometheus Operator. The monitor resources make it possible
to compose the scrape configurations in a Kubernetes way.

## Goals

- Allow for the administrator to define a named, reusable scrape configuration snippet, including unsafe elements such as file references.
- Allow for a user to select a configuration snippet by name in their probe/podmonitor/servicemonitor endpoint configuration.
- Avoid giving the user the ability to use arbirary files within the Prometheus pod.

### Audience

- Users who serve Prometheus as a service and want to give their customers autonomy in defining monitors.
- Users who want to scrape pods within an Istio mesh.

## How

The proposed solution is to introduce a notion of a *scrape class*, akin to a Kubernetes [storage class](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/storage-classes/).

> A scrape class defines TLS settings (and possibly other settings in future, e.g. non-safe authorization settings) to be applied to all scrape configs of that class.

Reviewer 2: (nit)
```suggestion
A scrape class defines TLS settings (and possibly other settings in future, e.g. sensitive authorization settings) to be applied to all scrape configs of that class.
```

One scrape class may be designated as the default class, in which case that class is applied to any scrape config that doesn't specify a value for `scrapeClass`.

When defining a podmonitor/servicemonitor/probe/scrapeconfig, a user may assign a scrape class via the `scrapeClass` field.
For monitors, each endpoint may be assigned a scrape class.

Class names are assumed to be installation-specific. In practice, some common class names like `istio-mtls` are likely to emerge.

### Prometheus Resource

> It is proposed that the `Prometheus` resource contain a new section for defining scrape classes.

Reviewer 2: (nit) I assume that it applies to Prometheus and PrometheusAgent :)

```suggestion
It is proposed that the `Prometheus` and `PrometheusAgent` resources contain a new section for defining scrape classes.
```

The rationale for defining scrape classes inline is that, in practice, the TLS file paths are closely related to the `volumeMounts`
of the `Prometheus` spec. An alternative is outlined later, of factoring the class definitions into a separate resource.

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: Prometheus
spec:
  # define scrape classes for use by the monitors
  # one class may be designated as the default class
  scrapeClasses:
    - name: istio-mtls
      default: true
      tlsConfig:
        caFile: "/etc/istio-certs/root-cert.pem"
        certFile: "/etc/istio-certs/cert-chain.pem"
        keyFile: "/etc/istio-certs/key.pem"
        insecureSkipVerify: true

  # mount the certs from the istio sidecar (shown here for illustration purposes)
  volumeMounts:
    - name: istio-certs
      mountPath: "/etc/istio-certs/"
```

Any object references in the scrape class definition are assumed to refer to objects in the namespace of the `Prometheus` object.

### PodMonitor Resource

Allow the user to select a scrape class for each endpoint.

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: PodMonitor
spec:
  podMetricsEndpoints:
  - port: http
    path: /metrics

>     scrapeClass: istio-mtls

Reviewer 4: Why per endpoint and not per object? I am curious since many `*Class` objects (`runtimeClass`, `storageClass`, `ingressClass`) in kubernetes are applied on the whole child object and not just part of the configuration. Since there is no restriction on how many PodMonitors there can be, shouldn't prometheus-operator follow the same principle as kubernetes?

Reviewer 5: I agree with you @paulfantom

Reviewer 2: I missed this comment but I agree that it makes more sense to operate at the spec level than at the endpoint level.
